## 1. Define and explain what a graph is, and explain different basic types of graphs.

Neo4J stores data as *vertices* and *edges*, or *nodes* and *relationships* to make it sound a little clearer. The nodes are the ‘data’, the graphs containing information, and the relationships are the things binding the nodes together.

**Directed graphs/digraphs** are the type of graph used in Neo4J. They consist of **nodes/vertices**, and **edges/arrows/relationships**. The nodes are **graph entities**, and the **arrows**, or **edges**, are the connections between the nodes, showing which directions they relate to one another through.

A digraph consists of a nonempty set **V(G)**, the **vertices of G**, known as a **vertex**, and **E(G), the edges of G**, known as a **directed edge. **An edge starts at a vertex, and ends at another vertex, wherein the start and end points of the edge are called the **tail** and **head** of the edge. 

An **in-degree** is the amount of edges coming into a node, meaning the number of **heads** pointing to a node, and **out-degree** is the opposite - the amount of **tails** coming out of it. 

A **walk** is the sequence of edges traversed to get from A to B in a graph. A **path** is a walk that never revisits a vertex/node. A **closed walk** is a walk that begins and ends at the same vertex. A **cycle** is a **closed walk** that never revisits a vertex, except for the starting vertex, meaning a mix between a **closed walk** and a **path**.

## Simple graphs (Undirected graph)

Simple graphs are symmetric graphs, graphs that have mutual relationships. They’re equal to digraphs, but are **undirected,** connecting two vertices without pointing directions between them, meaning they do not specify the direction of the relationship, or the head and tail of the relationship.

In a simple graph there cannot be more than one edge between two vertices, and they cannot **self-loop,** meaning they cannot point to themselves.

 

**Digraph – **(v -> g)

**Simple graph – **(v – g)