## 2. Explain which type of graphs Neo4j relies on, and what its constituents are.

Neo4j makes use of **directed graphs.** It stores data as *vertices* and *edges*, or *nodes* and *relationships* to make it sound a little clearer. The nodes are the ‘data’, the graphs containing information, and the relationships are the things binding the graphs together. More specifically, Neo4j makes use of a directed graph called a **property graph,** meaning along with the constituents of **nodes** and **relationships,** it also has **properties.**

**They consist of **nodes and **relationships**. The nodes are **graph entities**, and the **arrows**, or **relationships**, are the connections between the nodes, showing which directions they relate to one another through. **Nodes are the name of the data records in a graph,** and **data is stored as properties, which are stored as simple key/value pairs.**

A digraph consists of a nonempty set **V(G)**, the **vertices of G**, known as a **vertex**, and **E(G), the edges of G**, known as a **directed edge. **An edge starts at a vertex, and ends at another vertex, wherein the start and end points of the edge are called the **tail** and **head** of the edge. 

An **in-degree** is the amount of edges coming into it, meaning the number of **heads** connect to the graph, and **out-degree** is the opposite, the amount of **tails** coming out of it. 

A **walk** is the sequence of edges traversed to get from A to B in a graph. A **path** is a walk that never revisits a vertex/node. A **closed walk** is a walk that begins and ends at the same vertex. A **cycle** is a **closed walk** that never revisits a vertex, except for the starting vertex, meaning a mix between a **closed walk** and a **path**.