## 4. When would you choose a graph database for implementing a new application?

A graph database makes sense when you're building an application that requires a lot of relational searching, especially when you're searching on several depths. It especially excels at this when working with datasets that are quite huge, as whereas an SQL system would be required to calculate Cartesian products for Joins, a graph database would theoretically be just as fast no matter what the amount of data there is.

The primary example for the case for graph databases is a **social network**. In the example of a social network modeled in a relational database, you’d have the table of users, along with a table with the relations between every user, following a one-to-many relation of **one user has many friends**. 

Simple explanation: Given a dataset of 50,000 people, wherein our query is supposed to return 1,000 total, a depth of 5 will require **five Cartesian products**, resulting in intermediate data of **50,000^5**, resulting in a very large amount of **I/O processing**, which is the costliest part of RDBMS operations. Neo4J needs no intermediate data, only finding the records required.

Examples of graphs: **Social networks, access control lists (Group Access Control/SecurityOps), network topologies (like a LAN or such), recommendation engines, taxonomy hierarchies (think biological family trees). Fairly specialized problem solving.** 

Used for network and IT operations, LDAP trees and other types of identity and access management. Is uniquely great at databases wherein entities have interwoven relationships between each other. **Fraud detection; matching suspicious behavior towards regular behavior**. Could be good for an **adaptive IDS, matching specific behaviors and sequences of behaviors** to each other to describe what’s regular operations. **Fuzzy searching/real time recommendations**.

Also is quite useful when you want to make something that can easily be converted from whiteboard drawings to a database, especially if you're trying to make something that more non-technical developers or testers can use. Graph databases are **whiteboard friendly**. You can make out relationships and nodes on a whiteboard as normal, and map it very easily to a graph database afterwards. Visually, graph databases are often shown basically how you’d describe entity relationships on a whiteboard.

It's also useful as a supplementary database, or **polyglot persistence**. Being a NoSQL database, it’s good at some things and not as good at others. Recommended to use in conjunction with, for example, a document
database like **Mongo** and a key-value store like **Redis**.