## 7. Explain Object-Graph Mapping (OGM) and its relation to ORM.

OGM is basically ORM for graph databases; it stands for **Object-Graph Mapping.** It allows for mapping POJO's to graphs much more easily without needing overly verbose Java API queries to insert objects into Neo4j. It's generally slower than regular queries through, being an ORM framework that needs to parse the objects before being able to perform the actual querying, so it's built for convenience over performance.

The OGM framework for Neo4j is called **SDN,** **Spring Data Neo4j.** It's part of the larger **Spring Data** open-source project that aims to create data-access frameworks for NoSQL databases, including MongoDB and Redis. As mentioned earlier, SDN is suited for running several smaller queries, but halters when trying to process larger, more complex or demanding queries, so keep that for the Java Core API.

**SDN** models POJO's similarly to regular ORM's, but with a few exceptions: For example, all relationships must be contained in a **Set<>** object, as it cannot use a List<> or Map<>.

```
@NodeEntity
public class User {
    String name;

    @Indexed(unique=true)
    String userId;
    @GraphId
    Long nodeId;
    User referredBy;
    @RelatedTo(type = “IS_FRIEND_OF”, direction = Direction.BOTH)
    Set<User> friends;
    @RelatedToVia
    Set<Viewing> views;
}
```

@**NodeEntity** annotates that the class is a Neo4J node. @**Indexed** notes that the userId field must be indexed and be unique. @**GraphId** notes that nodeId must be the Neo4Jnode UID. @**RelatedTo** and @**RelatedToVia** store the relationships of the node. The @**GraphId** nodeId is a field required by SDN for mapping. It’s also greatly recommended to create an index, as performing lookups through the UID is
performance-heavy.

Relationship entities are built in much the same way.

```
@RelationshipEntity(type = “HAS_SEEN”)
 public class Viewing {
    @GraphId
    Long relationshipId;

    @StartNode
    User user;

    @EndNode
    Movie movie;
}
```

You define that it is a **RelationshipEntity**, provide the @**GraphId** that’s mandatory, then define the Start and End nodes of the relationship. Adding these relationships to node entities is done through the @**RelatedToVia** annotation seen in the previous example.

Persisting entities to the database can be done two ways; through the Spring configuration, or through the *repository pattern.* Spring requires you to define the Neo4J config file in its XML config, and then using the **Neo4JTemplate** class.

```
GraphDatabaseService graphDB = getGraphDatabase();
Neo4jTemplate template = new Neo4jTemplate(graphDB);

Try (Transaction tx = template.getGraphDatabaseService().beginTx()) {
    User user = new User(“john001”,”John”);
    User savedUser = template.save(user);
    User loadedUser = template.findOne(savedUser.getNodeId(), User.class);
    tx.success();
}
```

This opens a template connection to the database, creates a new user, persists the user, and then loads up a user from the database within the transaction.

Repositories is referred to in Domain-Driven Design and Enterprise Application Architecture, which is *entirely* outside of our wheelhouse, so I have no idea if we need to mention it. Basically you define the database as a repository in the Spring config file, then instantiate an @**AutoWired** entity that implements the **GraphRepository** interface, then perform persistence through the instance’s methods.

Along with the entities, we can map queries through annotations as well.

```
@NodeEntity
public class User {
...     
 @Query( value =
     "match (n)-[r:IS_FRIEND_OF]-(friend)-[r2:IS_FRIEND_OF]-(fof) " +
     "where id(n) = {self} " +
     "return distinct fof")
     Iterable<User> friendsOfFriends;
```

In this context, whenever a User entity is loaded, this query is executed, and the result stored in the variable friendsOfFriends.