# Correlated subqueries

SQL allows testing tuples for membership in a relation. The `IN` connective tests for set membership, where the set is a collection of values produced by a `SELECT` clause. The `NOT IN` connective tests for the absence of set membership.

The following query: "Show all employees being managed by employee 1234 in year 2017", would display a list of the employees being managed by another employee in the year 2017 who has the ID 1234.

```sql
SELECT * 
FROM employees e
WHERE e.id IN (SELECT m.employee_id 
               FROM manages m
               WHERE m.manager_id = 1234 AND m.year = 2017);
```

In this type of simple nested subquery, the inner query would be executed once, and thereafter the outer query would be executed once with the return values from the inner query in the WHERE clause. This is a simple nested query - or a subquery.

Correlated subqueries defines a query where the subquery will be executed each time the outer query performs checks the condition of the WHERE clause. This typically happens when you use aggregations or WHERE inside of the subquery. 

Consider the following example where we find the names of the employees whose salary is greater than the average salary in their department.

```sql
SELECT e1.name 
FROM employees e1
WHERE e1.salary > (SELECT avg(e2.salary) 
               	   FROM employees e2
                   WHERE e2.dept = e1.dept);
```

As for this query, the subquery is executed once for every employee in the outer query. This is because the DBMS cannot optimize this query, because the employees that we are retrieving have different departments, and that means the result of the subquery differs depending on the department of the employee in the outer query.

Watch this video:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SM9cDMxAeK4

### Performance of correlated subqueries:

The performance of correlated subqueries are strongly dependent on the number of records retrieved by either the outer or inner query. Since the operation is squared in terms of time complexity, it is often better to use joins in terms of large datasets.

Subqueries are treated as functions, wherein you provide the correlation variables, and expect either a single or set of values. SQL evaluates the subquery by computing a Cartesian Product of the relations in the outer FROM clause, meaning the FROM clause outside of the subquery, and then testing the predicates in the WHERE clause for each tuple in the result. This is called a *correlation evaluation,* and is considered very inefficient due to the subquery being evaluated separately for every tuple in the outer level query, causing a lot of I/O operations which are very costly.

The result of this is that SQL optimizers often will attempt to convert a nested subquery into joins instead, if possible, due to the reduction of risk for random I/O operations. If not possible, the optimizer separates the subquery, optimizes it separately, and then performs the correlated evaluation. Replacing a nested query with a join is called *decorrelation*, and is highly recommended for efficiency.