## 4. Describe DDL(data definition language) and DML (data manipulation language) in SQL

### DDL (Data Definition Language).

They are called data definition since they are used for defining the data.  These SQL statements define the structure of a database, including rows, columns, tables, indexes, and database specifics such as file  locations.

- CREATE - to create objects in the database
- ALTER - alters the structure of the database
- DROP - delete objects from the database
- TRUNCATE - remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed
- COMMENT - add comments to the data dictionary
- RENAME - rename an object

### **DML**(Data Manipulation Language)

These SQL statements are used to retrieve and manage data. This category encompasses the most fundamental commands. DML SQL commands include the following:

- SELECT - retrieve data from the a database
- INSERT - insert data into a table
- UPDATE - updates existing data within a table
- DELETE - deletes all records from a table, the space for the records remain
- MERGE - UPSERT operation (insert or update)
- CALL - call a PL/SQL or Java subprogram
- EXPLAIN PLAN - explain access path to data
- LOCK TABLE - control concurrency

Bonus Info:

### **TCL**:

For revoking the transactions and to make the data commit to the database we use TCL. Some of the TCL commands are:

- ROLLBACK
- COMMIT

ROLLBACK is used for revoking the transactions until last commit. COMMIT is used for committing the transactions to the database. Once we commit we cannot rollback. Once we rollback we cannot commit.
Commit and Rollback are generally used to commit or revoke the transactions that are with regard to DML commands.

### **DCL**:

Data Control Language is used for the control of data. That is a user can access any data based on the privileges given to him. This is done through DCL. Some of the DCL Commands are:

- GRANT
- REVOKE.