# Join conditions

*Taget fra side 114 (4.1.1) i 'Database System Concepts 6th Edition':*

In addition to natural joins and cartesian product joins, a join condition can be specified, allowing a general predicate over the relations being joined. The `ON` condition allows is to define on which columns two relations should be matched. The `ON` condition is written similarly to the `WHERE` condition:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM student JOIN takes ON student.ID= takes.ID;
```

The `on` condition above specifies that a tuple from student matches a tuple from takes if their ID values are equal - this is basically similar to writing a `compareTo()` metod in Java, where we define how two objects should be compared. The join expression in this case is almost the same as the join expression `student NATURAL JOIN takes`, since the natural join operation also requires that for a student tuple and a takes tuple to match. The one difference is that the result has the ID attribute listed twice, in the join result, once for student and once for takes, even though their ID values must be the same.

In fact, the above query is equivalent to the following query (in other words, they generate exactly the same results):

```sql
SELECT *
FROM student, takes
WHERE student.ID = takes.ID;
```

As we have seen earlier, the relation name is used to disambiguate the attribute name ID, and thus the two occurrences can be referred to as student.ID and takes.ID respectively. A version of this query that displays the ID value only once is as follows:

```sql
SELECT student.ID, name, dept_name, tot_cred,
course_id, sec_id, semester, year, grade
FROM student JOIN takes ON student.ID = takes.ID;
```

The on condition can express any SQL predicate, and thus a join expressions using the on condition can express a richer class of join conditions than natural join. However, as illustrated by our preceding example, a query using a join expression with an on condition can be replaced by an equivalent expression without the on condition, with the predicate in the on clause moved to the where clause. Thus, it may appear that the on condition is a redundant feature of SQL. However, there are two good reasons for introducing the on condition. First, we shall see shortly that for a kind of join called an outer join, on conditions do behave in a manner different from where conditions. Second, an SQL query is often more readable by humans if the join condition is specified in the on clause and the rest of the conditions appear in the where clause.

*Læs evt. videre om outer-joins på side 115 (4.1.2), da der også bliver vist nogle eksempler her.*