7. Materialized views.

Materialized views are used when specific queries are very frequent. So to optimize the performance we materialize the view. The difference between a regular view and a materialized view is that the regular view does only store the specific query, thus having to create the complete Cartesian product of the relations included and afterwards filtering. In a materialized view we duplicate the data from the relations in question, which then makes it much faster to retrieve the data.

As the data is replicated the inconsistency problem might occur as data in the materialized view might not be up-to-date with the data in the underlying relations.

The process used to keep the view up-to-date is called materialized view maintenance (view maintenance for short). There are different types of maintenance. 

- immediate (the data is automatically updated as soon as the corresponding relations are updated, this is performance heavy).
- deferred (the data is updated at a specific interval, thus may not be up-to-date / use with caution if up-to-date data is needed in the application).

These different maintenance approaches can be defined by the database administrator in some database types. Others you would have to refer to the database documentation for information about view maintenance. 

One way you can maintain the materialized view manually is by using triggers. So when an insert, update or deletion on the referred relations are performed it will automatically update the date in the materialized view.

Here is an example of a materialized view created in the database:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW view-name
BUILD [IMMEDIATE | DEFERRED]
REFRESH [FAST | COMPLETE | FORCE ]
ON [COMMIT | DEMAND ]
[[ENABLE | DISABLE] QUERY REWRITE]
AS
SELECT <select statement>
```

The above example is for Oracle relational databases where you can chose immediate or deferred view maintenance, which includes a refresh policy which can be fast (a quick refresh of data is done), complete (a complete refresh of all data is done) or force (will first try a quick refresh, if that is not possible a complete refresh is done). Then you can determine whether the refresh should be done when a commit is made to underlying relations or when the view itself is demanded. The enable/disable query rewrite overwrites the rewrite state, which ensures that writing to the view is not possible when the data i out-of-date. After configuration the select statement is created which marks the construction of the materialized view.

#### Things to consider when using materialized views

Efficiency benefits a materialized depends on

- Size of data
- Complexity of view
- Number of queries using the view
- number of modification affecting the view