## 11. Describe triggers - purpose and general function

A database trigger is procedural code that is automatically executed in response to certain events on a particular table or view in a database. The trigger is mostly used for maintaining the integrity of the information on the database. For example, when a new record (representing a new worker) is added to the employees table, new records should also be created in the tables of the taxes, vacations and salaries. A trigger cannot be called or executed; the DBMS automatically fires the trigger as a result of a data modification to the associated table. Triggers are used to maintain the referential integrity of data by changing the data in a systematic fashion.

Each trigger is attached to a single, specified table in the database.

The four main types of triggers are:

- Row Level Trigger: This gets executed before or after any column value of a row changes
- Column Level Trigger: This gets executed before or after the specified column changes
- For Each Row Type: This trigger gets executed once for each row of the result set affected by an insert/update/delete
- For Each Statement Type: This trigger gets executed only once for the entire result set, but also fires each time the statement is executed.

A trigger can also contain INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE logic within itself, so when the trigger is fired because of data modification it can also cause another data modification, thereby firing another trigger. A trigger that contains data modification logic within itself is called a nested trigger.

Example:

```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER limitSalary
	BEFORE INSERT ON INSTRUCTOR
	REFERENCING OLD AS O NEW AS N
FOR EACH ROW WHEN(N.SALARY >= 100000)
DECLARE
	NEWSAL NUMBER;
BEGIN
	SELECT MAX(I.SALARY) INTO NEWSAL FROM INSTRUCTOR I;
	:N.SALARY := NEWSAL;
END; 
```

