## 16. What is a query evaluation plan?

And **evaluation plan** is a part of the overall activity of **query processing. **Query Processing is the process in which a written query is processed into a usable form for the DBMS. It parses the query, optimizes it and evaluates it. SQL, for example, is not a direct command to the DBMS, but something that the DBMS parses into extended relational algebra that it can then evaluate.

For example, if giventhe following SQL query:

*`SELECT salary FROM instructor WHERE salary < 75000;`*

the DBMS will translate this query into something more resembling;

*`σ salary < 75000 (Π salary (instructor))`*

When tasked with running a query, the system will take use of evaluation primitives, which are instructions on how to evaluate the query, and construct a **query-execution plan**, also called an **evaluation plan**, basically a sequence of primitive operations that will make up the resulting query. The different evaluation/execution plans possible can have different costs, and as such, the DBMS will perform query optimization to identify the most effective evaluation plan.

Query evaluation is made up of studies of the different individual operations that can make up an evaluation plan. The operations can be categorized by their CPU time, disk accesses, cost of communication and the like. Disk access speeds are usually the most important variable, due to the currently still relatively slow speeds of read/write access to disk. 

**Query optimization** is the DBMS taking the declarative SQL query sent to it, reducing it into relational primitives, and then using **equivalence rules** to attempt to restructure the query into different **evaluation plans.** Every **evaluation plan** is another version of the original query, basically a plan of *"in which order do we want to perform these actions for highest effectiveness."* 

And example of calculating evaluation plans is if we send a query wherein we perform two different **natural joins.** For every join we perform, the DBMS is required to calculate a cartesian product between the two relations. The amount of time it will take to calculate this product can potentially differ depending on the order we take them in, and the DBMS calculates this through statistical analysis of the relations provided.

If we take a query that resolves into the expression;

`Π name,title (σ dept_name= “Music” (instructor ⋈ (teaches ⋈ Π course_id,title (course))))`

The DBMS would realize that the expression constructs a large intermediate relation between *instructor, teaches* and the projection of *course.* Being that we are only interested in a few tuples, the expression will be converted by the DBMS into:

`Π name,title ((σ dept_name= “Music” (instructor)) ⋈ (teaches ⋈ Π course_id,title (course)))`

The ultimate result of this is the same as the first expression, except it generates fewer intermediate relations, as *instructor* is abstracted away from the other relations. Basically, the query optimizer has the task of creating a query that is the most efficient, while still giving the exact same result as requested.

This requires three steps: 

1. generating expressions that are logically equivalent to the given expression 
2. annotating the resulting expressions in alternative ways to generate new **query-evaluation plans**
3. estimating the cost of each evaluation plan. These evaluations are taken from statistical information about the evaluation primitives taken in use, as well as statistical information about the database and the relations in use.

Most RDBMS systems can display these plans, usually through operators such as EXPLAIN.