## 21. Describe a weak entity(Relational DB design)

A **weak entity** is an entity/tuple that has no attributes through which it can be uniquely identified. Simply, it’s an entity that cannot contain a Primary Key without a Foreign Key linking it to another **Strong Entity**. Another way to describe it, is that it is an entity that has no meaning or use without a connection to a Strong Entity.

When a weak entity associates with a strong entity, the strong entity is described as an **identifying **or **owner entity. **A weak entity is **existence dependent **on a strong entity. 

#### Example:

As an example, we can take a web shop. We have an entity called *Order*, which is an entity that contains orders made by customers. We have another entity called *OrderItem*, which contains unique items connected to a specific Order. When you order things from a web shop, you often get a unique identifier on every item in the order, for example if you need to request an RMA on one of the items if it’s defective. The items present in the *OrderItem* entity have no purpose unless they relate to an identifying entity, the Order.

#### Example 2:

A ROOM cannot exist without a BUILDING. On the other hand, a TIRE might be considered as a strong entity because it also can exist without being attached to a CAR.

Basically, weak entities are entities that cannot exist without a foreign key to a strong entity, which is an entity that has attributes through which it can be uniquely identified.

