## 24. Explain the concept of functional dependency. (α -> β)

Decomposing schemas can often be done through analyzation of functional dependencies. Functional dependencies are oftentimes denoted through relational algebra, requiring understanding of the quasi-mathematical notation, primarily consistent of Greek lettering.

**r(R)** - relation schema
**r** - a relation
**R** - a set of attributes
**K** - superkey, such as "K is a superkey of r(R)."
**a,b,c,d..** - relations are all presented in lowercase, such as 'instructor'.
**F** - all functional dependencies
**F+** - closure, all implicit functional dependencies
**⊆ **- subset of, as in L is a subset of R.

An instance of a relation that satisfies the constraints placed unto it is a legal instance of a relation, and a legal database is a database where all instances of relations are legal. Constraints are presented either as keys, or as functional dependencies.

A functional dependency is a way to describe a constraint or relationship between two different sets of values in a database schema. Per its name, it describes a way in which a set of values are defined by the values in another set. For example, we can say that we have two columns;

`name --> address`

In this, we say that "address is functionally dependent on name". The value present in the **address** column of a tuple is defined by the value present in the **name** column of the tuple, because the address is different depending on the person who is being described. 

A functional dependency is said to 'hold' if the dependency is found to be fully valid. For example, if we say that 'budget' is functionally dependent on 'department', that dependency holds if 'budget' in fact is determined by the value in 'department'. If a relational schema is constrained by functional dependencies, and all those dependencies hold, then F holds on r(R).

A functional dependency only holds if t1 = t2, meaning if tuple 1 and tuple 2 have the same values. So if we say that C is functionally dependent on A, but we find an instance wherein t1[A] = t2[A], yet t1[C] =/= t2[C], then we can safely say that the dependency does not hold. This means that if we have a set of tuples wherein A is the same value, but all instances of C in this tuples are not the same, then C is not functionally dependent on A, as A clearly does not define C. The only time this could happen legally and still hold as a dependency is if it is not a *functional* dependency, but a *multivalued* dependency. Multivalued dependencies are described in the notes for question 28.

A functional dependency is categorized as 'trivial' if they are satisfied by all relations. For example, A is functionally dependent on AB, and is satisfied by all relations involving the attribute A, being that A is part of AB.

α  -> β is trivial if β is a subset of α. For example, in AB -> A, A is a subset of AB, as A is a part of AB.

A closure is the full set of all functional dependencies that are not explicitly stated. For example, if F is          A --> B and B --> C, then F+ is A --> C. It is not explicitly stated, but being that A is dependent on B, and B is dependent on C, then A is, by association, dependent on C. More on this in the notes for question 26.