## 26. Explain the two concepts of closure (F+ and α+)

Closure is defined by implicit functional dependencies, drawn from the explicitly stated dependencies. If we say that; 

`t1[A] = t2[A]`

and A -> B then it holds that:

`t1[B] = t2[B]` 

If we then say that B -> H, we know that:

`t1[H] = t2[H] since t1[B] = t2[B], since t1[A] = t2[A]` 

Therefore, we can say that if t1[A] = t2[A], then it logically follows that t1[H] = t2[H].

Armstrong's Axioms are used for calculating logically implied functional dependencies. They are sound, because they do not generate incorrect functional dependencies, and they are complete, as they allow us to fully map all implied functional dependencies.

#### Reflexivity rule

 If α is a set of attributes, and β  is a subset of α , then α --> β holds.

#### Augmentation rule

If α --> β holds, and γ is a set of attributes, then γα --> γβ holds.

#### Transitivity rule

If α --> β holds, and β  --> γ holds, then α --> γ holds.



We have A --> B and B --> H. Therefore, we can deduce that A --> H holds. The reason is that as B is dependent on A, and H is dependent on B, H is indirectly dependent on A.

This can be very time-consuming to do in order to calculate the full closure of a set of functional dependencies. There are additional rules that can be applied to simplify the process:

#### Union rule

If α --> β holds, and α --> γ holds, then α --> βγ holds.

If we have CG --> H and CG --> I, we can deduce that CG --> HI. 

#### Decomposition rule

If α --> βγ holds, then α --> β holds, and α --> γ  holds.

#### Pseudotransitivity rule

If α --> β holds, and γβ --> Ω holds, then αγ --> Ω holds.

Given A --> C and CG --> I, we can deduce that AG --> I. 



α+ is the denotation of a set of all attributes functionally determined by α under a set F of functional dependencies. It is the closure of α. Calculating α+ is done through an algorithm. 

Here, := means *is defined to be.*

```
result := α;
repeat
	for each functional dependency β → γ in F do
		begin
			if β ⊆ result then result := result ∪ γ;
		end
until (result does not change)
```

We have α as the initial result. For every functional dependency β → γ in F, we say that if β is a subset of α, meaning that if the values in β are present in α, then α becomes αγ, denoted as α. 

We start with a schema, comprised of three sets: A,B,C. This schema has two functional dependencies:        A --> B, and B --> C. We start with A as the initial result, and the first functional dependency, A --> B. The left side of the functional dependency, A, is in the initial result, A. Therefore, we include the right side of the dependency in the result, making the result AB. Taking the next functional dependency, B --> C, B is in the result now, being that it is AB, and so we include C into the result, making it ABC. This way, we have computed that A+ is ABC.

Testing the closure of a set of attributes α can be used to determine whether α is a superkey. If you compute α+, and α+ contains all attributes in R, then α is a superkey.

You can check if the dependency α --> β holds by checking if β is a subset of α+.



An attribute of a functional dependency is extraneous if it can be removed without changing the closure of a set of functional dependencies. For example, if we have the dependencies AB -> C and A -> C, then B is extraneous, as we can remove it from the equation without changing the closure.

A canonical cover is noted as Fc. Fc is a set of dependencies that F logically implies, and vice versa. A canonical cover Fc must however also satisfy two rules: No functional dependency in Fc can contain an extraneous attribute, and each left side of a functional dependency in Fc is unique. A canonical cover provides the same closure as F, but further simplified, cutting down on the amount of processing time required to calculate it.