## 27. Explain why decomposing a relation can have undesirable effects.

Decomposing a relation, meaning splitting up a relation into several relations/tables, can cause loss of data, or cause inconsistencies in the data you would get from the database before and after the decomposition. A **lossless **decomposition is a decomposition in which the decomposition of a table/relation causes no changes in the data you retrieve between the now-decomposed relations if you were to join them, whereas a **lossy** decomposition  is a decomposition wherein the data we retrieve through a join has changed as a result of the decomposition.

Importantly, **lossy** and **lossless** does not mean we're *losing data*. Instead, we're losing *informational integrity.* 

Let's say we have a table wherein we have people, their CPR number, and their address. In a single table, let's say we have two people with the same name, but otherwise differing data.

(In this example you would have used CPR as primary key in both tables, so the example doesn't make sense in this context)

| CPR  | Name     | Address                 |
| :--- | :------- | :---------------------- |
| 1111 | Preben   | 69 Smutvej              |
| 2222 | Majbritt | 420 Ridder Jernskægsvej |
| 3333 | Majbritt | 666 Kildeengen          |

Normalization says we should split these up, so let's split them into two tables.

| CPR  | Name     |
| ---- | -------- |
| 1111 | Preben   |
| 2222 | Majbritt |
| 3333 | Majbritt |

| Name     | Address                 |
| -------- | ----------------------- |
| Preben   | 69 Smutvej              |
| Majbritt | 420 Ridder Jernskægsvej |
| Majbritt | 666 Kildeengen          |

If we were to join these two, we would be given a combined result.

| CPR  | Name     | Address                 |
| ---- | -------- | ----------------------- |
| 1111 | Preben   | 69 Smutvej              |
| 2222 | Majbritt | 420 Ridder Jernskægsvej |
| 2222 | Majbritt | 666 Kildeengen          |
| 3333 | Majbritt | 420 Ridder Jernskægsvej |
| 3333 | Majbritt | 666 Kildeengen          |

Because we decomposed the original relation into two tables, we have lost the link that differentiates between the two different people named Majbritt, so when joining the tables, the DBMS does not know which address belongs to which CPR number. This is a **lossy** decomposition.