## 28. Explain the fourth normal form (4NF)

First off, as with all of the other normal forms, 4NF requires that all prior normal forms be fulfilled.

The fourth normal form differs from the prior normal forms, as it does not concern itself with functional dependencies, but instead with multivalued dependencies. 

A relation schema R is in 4NF, fourth normal form, if it is in respect to a set D of both functional and multivalued dependencies, holding on either:  α -->> β is trivial, or α is a superkey for R. It is a BCNF schema that also includes multivalued dependencies. 

Multivalued dependencies do not rule out that you can have certain tuples in a value in a functional dependency. In regular functional dependencies, α --> β does not allow for there to be several instances of α connected to several instances of β, wherein β has different values.

The multivalued dependency α -->> β holds, if in any legal instance of relation r(R), for all pairs of tuples t1 and t2 existing such that t1[α] = t2[α], there exist tuples t3 and t4 in r, such that:

`t1[α] = t2[α] = t3[α] = t4[α]`
`t1[β] = t3[β]`
`t2[β] = t4[β]`
`t2[R - β] = t3[R - β]`
`t1[R - β] = t4[R - β]`

In a multivalued dependency, the relationship between α and β is independent of the relationship between α and R - β. 

An example is a company making two colors of bikes a year, with the schema:

 `R(bike_model,manuf_year,color)`

 Here, **bike_model** -->> **manuf_year** and **bike_model** -->> **color**. **Manuf_year** and **color** are independent of one another, but both are dependent on **bike_model** in such a way that there can only be two instances of **bike_model**, and therefore two instances of **manuf_year** connected to the model, but each **bike_model** must have a different color.

An example of 4NF is; 

`r2(ID,dept_name,street,city)` 

where **ID -->> street,city**. In this case, the value of **dept_name** would have to be repeated for every address that **ID** is connected to, such that if a teacher in a department has more than one residence, several tuples are inserted wherein **dept_name** is repeated, and **street,city** are different. Therefore, to be in 4NF, r2 must be decomposed into: 

`r21(ID,dept_name)` 

`r22(ID,street,city)`