### 25. Describe a normalized data model with respect to documents. When to choose it?

Usually you use the embedded model when working with a document database, this is due to the ability of schema less structures which makes it possible to embed all data needed for an object in said object. This makes querying for related data very easy as it only takes you finding the specific object in order to retrieve all necessary information.

But as we know from normalization of a relational database, if we have static data that is repeated for each tuple in a relation you will have a problem when it comes to updating the data, as you would need to update the data multiple times, and there is a possibility of data inconsistency. 

So when to normalize a document database? In the case that the duplication of data and working with this outweighs the benefits of data retrieval when embedded.

So in this case you could do a normalization of the database, and create multiple collections resembling a relational structure with key references being stored in objects. This will then require you to retrieve multiple objects which are stored different places, and would impact the performance of the query operation. To increase the performance you can use a tree structure to create a easy reference to the underlying collections. But this is a more complex operation and in case of having data that is structured relationally, preferably you should use a relational database or maybe a graph database.